Welcome to the second sessions of our
interview series titled Expert from
Africa that is included in the Executive
Sport Management Training Level 1.
This training initiative is developed by
the Sport Management Program at West
Virginia University in collaboration with
the Sport Leaders Institute of Zimbabwe
as a part of Module 4 Management of Sport
organizations.
We are honored to be joined today by
Doctor Winnie Tubey,
a prominent academic sport development
advocate and strategic leader in African
sport policy and education.
My name is Gonzalo Bravo,
Professor of Sport Management in the
School of Sports Science at West Virginia
University,
where I've been teaching and researching
global sport policy and government for
the past 20 years.
I have the pleasures of moderating
today's conversations.
Doctor Tubey currently serves as Lecturer
and Chair of the Postgraduate Committee
in the Department of Hospitality and
Human Ecology at the Technical University
of Kenya.
Beyond academia,
she is deeply involved in the continental
sport development space as Coordinator
for International Organizations
Partnerships at the African Sport
Management Association.
She's also the chairperson of Transform
Green World,
an NGO advancing climate smart programs,
and a Fellow of the Climate Change
Leadership Program.
Her work powerfully bridge research,
policy,
and practice champion sport as a catalyst
for sustainable development, use,
empowerment, and community transformation.
Today,
we will explore her unique insights into
sport developments, sport tourism,
and education in Africa,
as well as the strategic directions of
organizations like ASMA the American
Sports Management Association.
Doctor Tubey,
thank you so much for joining us.
Thank you, Professor Bravo.
Let's start this conversation first by
tell us or elaborate a little bit about
your background, OK, Which is I, you know,
mentions a few things about what you have
done, your training,
but what inspired you interested in sport
tourism and issues related to climate
change, for example?
Well, interesting you should ask me that,
Prof.
I am.
I grew up in the Highlands of Kenya,
specifically in a county known as Nandi
County that is the source of champions.
It is where we have our great athletes.
Kenya is known as a powerhouse of
athletics and I grew up in the same
neighborhood as Faith Kipiago and as
Eluduki, as Eluduki Keno,
as all these great athletes that we have
now.
That in itself growing up in that space
gives you the inspiration to, you know,
want to participate.
And then unfortunately,
I was too slow for the Kenyan athletes,
so I did not make it to,
to the to the team.
But with time,
I found myself within the tourism
industry.
I'm a trained hotelier and in that space,
it's a leisure industry.
There's a lot of adventure,
there's a lot of fun,
there's a lot of sports and I was
thinking, Oh my God,
this is my childhood passion.
I love tourism, I love sports.
Why not make it a thing?
Why not make it my thing now that I
couldn't run when I can research in that
space.
Thank you prof.
Excellent, excellent, excellent.
Very interesting.
You know,
and interesting that you mentioned about
that, that, that,
that specifically part of Kenya,
which is I don't have actually the, the,
the privilege to, to be there,
but I hopefully one day I will,
I will visit.
You know that you're you're much welcome.
Now for those less familiar, you know,
could you provide us an overview,
a brief overview of the sport development
in Kenya in your country, right?
And what have been some of the country's
major achievements?
You already mentioned about, you know,
the long history, right,
which is well known about, you know,
athletes, you know, in long distance,
you know, events in track, you know,
in marathons,
but all but who are some of those,
you know, iconic athletes as well?
If you can give us a little bit of
background about that.
Well,
Kenya is largely a sporting destination.
We, we do not just excellent athletics,
we athletic, we excel in track.
We also excel in sports like volleyball,
football, which well,
we're struggling a bit on that.
But then also we have rugby and there's
so many other spaces within which we do
very well.
We've been known for cricket for quite a
while.
We were champions of Africa for such a
while.
We are,
we are the African champions for we all.
We get to the finals actually in the
Rugby 57 finals.
So you can see we are a country that
loves sports now.
We've had a challenge when it comes to
development of sporting itself in terms
of infrastructure, in terms of, you know,
academies where we purely can't train the
local talent.
Our talent is quite raw,
if I may say that.
It's sort of natural talent that has not
really gone through, you know,
intensive training that should be there
because we lack the infrastructure.
But then we have local programs that are
that being, you know, initiated.
We have something like the Talanta Hella
program,
which targets young people in at the
grassroot levels.
We have the Kenya Academy of Sports that
has been put up recently.
And now we can see there's some level of
understanding that we need to develop our
talent.
We don't just tap from the community,
but we need to develop it over time.
So I'm really honoured to speak towards
development in in Kenya because we've
seen federations now being registered.
You have to register the federation
through a myriad of steps that require
intense scrutiny.
So that we just have well balanced and
well managed sporting organizations.
That's in that has been another challenge.
The leadership right from community level
all the way to, you know,
structures that can, that can be,
you know, sustainable, right?
So, yeah,
right now you're talking about some of
the challenges, right?
In terms of the, the, the specific,
you know, the structure,
you know the problem.
You mentioned the talent right now.
Can you elaborate something about you
know the challenge, you know,
or opportunities in terms of the
specifically about the training and
developing of sport professionals, right.
In other words, are people getting,
you know,
the how how does someone wants to work in
sports right in Kenya will get will get
trained, you know,
and what type of training can can they
get there?
The very few institutions that do offer
training at that level,
especially it comes to real academics
where we talk about principles,
we talk about abstract thinking and took
critical thoughts in leadership for the
sporting destinations.
But now we train the athletes, you know,
we train the the our sportsmen and our
sports ladies at the pitch,
which is coaching more or less.
But now when it comes to leadership
management, you know,
the functions of coordination,
functions of resource allocations,
things that require a background but are
really important,
then we have very few institutions that
offer that.
We have a universities at the university
level and that is only for those who do
physical education and not more,
not most of us go through physical
education.
We,
we are trainers by virtue of having been
former players, right.
So there is that gap that comes in
between understanding what is required of
a coach, of a referee, of, you know,
a manager.
It requires some really structured
training, right?
And that is 1 area that we can, we can,
can build on.
I really think that is a gap that we
really need to plug in as a country and
as a as an,
as a continent for that matter.
Yeah.
And I, and I guess in that respects,
you know, the asthma, you know,
probably has to do something with that,
which is, you know,
inspired in other regional sports
management associations that exist across
the world in terms of, you know, make it,
you know,
a sports management education available
for people.
But can you tell us a little bit about
your role as coordinator for
international organizations or
partnerships at the African Sports
Management Association?
What does your work involve specifically?
Yes, So proof.
Allow me to just mention that asthma is
African Sports Management Association.
And this means that we are a community of
individuals and memberships.
So we could be a member through being a
part of an institution.
For instance,
I'm at the Technical University of Kenya
and as an academic, I can be a member.
I, I know S.L.I.Z., yeah, is part of us,
is a member of ASMA.
So across the continent we've partnered
and we've worked with people who are
interested in developing sports in Africa.
Now my role there is to ensure that these
linkages are sustained.
It's just to ensure that we bring in more
people on board.
I speak about asthma in all the functions
that I visit just so that we understand
that we, we cannot work alone.
We require partnerships, require networks,
and one of them has borne this interview
because it is through those partnerships.
And I have had the privilege of being at
Harare.
I've visited S.L.I.Z.'s offices,
I've visited the facilities,
I've been part of the training programs
and I've really gotten a lot of value
from that partnership which I've carried
back home and brought in on board so many
other members.
So it's through these linkages that we've
been able to establish some some African
commonality where we want to say we are
one.
The Ubuntu spirit of Africa,
the nuances of Africa is like that.
We are one.
It is always 1 spirit.
If we decide on one goal,
then we go together.
And so we are trying to achieve that
through asthma, through sleaze.
And with the Sports Leadership Institute
of Zimbabwe, we've always,
we've also curated the Sports Leadership
Institute of Africa.
And it's through those networks that now
we are championing grassroots development
of sport, community sport.
We want to start it right there where the
talent is and want to inculcate
leadership skills because I think that is
the gap,
as I mentioned earlier that we have
envisioned as a, as a, as an institute,
as an association as well, right?
No, that's, that's a, you know,
it's a really, really an important,
you know,
aspect that what you're doing connecting,
you know, other with other organizations,
right.
And then probably I that's why you get
connected with this four leadership
Institute of Zimbabwe, right?
Right now,
one thing that I still it's not totally
clear to me, you know,
when I was reading your,
your your bio and background.
You also has a participates in some NGO's
related with climate change.
Could you you connect, you know,
how is that trilogy, you know,
climate change, sport development,
you know, agents, you know, and tourism,
right.
Really, you know, or,
or or how do you approach these things?
Yeah, I understand your Prof.
Let me put this.
I think I'm growing up in the gig economy
where you do a myriad of things and you
find yourself now cultivating to see how
do they connect and they realize that I
have a passion for sustainability.
It really does not matter in which aspect
whether it's an indication as an
indicator.
I want to see how sustainable principle
can can be embedded into it and this has
taken me to spaces in sports.
I want to see how do we sustain these
aspects.
We want our children to enjoy the the
goodness of Mother Nature that we've
earned over time.
The spirit of Africa is in our soil.
It is in our.
It's in nature.
It's embedded in the relationship we have
with nature, flora, fauna.
And we can see the effects of climate
change.
And this has affected vulnerable groups.
I speak for women in our communities.
They want to participate in sport.
But because of reality,
the reality is have on the ground on
issues to do with this appropriation of
resources.
Yeah,
sometimes even the ownership of resources
is skewed.
But now we are saying how can we talk
about development without inclusivity,
without sustainability.
So I talk,
I speak to my youth because our NGO is in
rehabilitation of it's called Transfer
Green World and we are in the
rehabilitation of wetlands.
We have reforested about 2000 acres in
the FAR in the last three years.
In our communities,
we we talked to the young people,
we talked to the women,
we talked to groups of communities and we
encourage them to participate in smart
agriculture and in those functions they
also participate in sport and sport has
been a very big vehicle in getting the
the message out.
Remember I said I've grown up in a
community of athletes.
So when we have a marathon,
we have a community work and we talk
about sustainability,
talk about reforestation, it,
it brings a different connection all
together.
And the youth now see the value of sport
beyond the field beyond,
and they see other opportunities also for
entrepreneurship that I don't need just
to be an athlete.
I can be something else within the
sporting industry.
Yeah, right.
Now this is, I mean,
this is very interesting because as you
mentioned, you know,
sustainability is actually is,
is one of the pillars not only from the
United Nations, right, but also, you know,
it's today within the Olympic movement,
you know,
as we need to really put attention right
to sustainable, you know, the environment,
right, which is, as you know,
is critical for for people who
participate in sports and also tourism,
right.
So these things are not,
are not disconnected.
Yeah, very, very interesting.
Now,
the last question that I have for you is
A and,
and actually this is two different
questions.
You know, when in one,
One is that in terms of the, the, the,
the challenges, you know, of what,
what are the challenges that you see,
you know, in terms of, you know,
the sport development in Africa?
You know, if from, from your,
from your experience, from your angle,
you know, as an educator, what can you,
if you can tell us, you know,
what are the challenge that you see that
you know,
sport development Africa has no moving
ahead.
I'll take that as well in two ways,
Prof First,
I'll start say that what's our,
our priorities?
I'll take that differently.
What is the priority we have as a
continent and some of the key issues that
come to me is we do not have professional
management of sports and that has really
hindered how we restructured our sports
environment.
We have made sports to be more of a
participation event and after the
participation, we go home.
We've seen stadia lying vacant for years
because, you know,
there was one world championship and none
other after that.
Then that we don't know what to do with
it and they become white elephants.
So if you can prioritize killing
structure, dedication, curriculum that,
you know,
speak to the specific needs of
communities because not everybody will
want to go run truck,
not everybody will have the talent to
play football.
But if the opportunity is there to
participate in physical education,
the structure,
there's a field for me to just go run,
you know, to jog.
It would make a difference.
And then then we have now the education
programs that come in at the community
level.
We have also talked about expanding
inclusivity.
It has become almost given that most
sport is played by one gender,
the other gender tends to be sort of,
you know, they, we, oh, oh,
they were there.
Let's let's add this, you know,
a female version of this and such like
things.
So creating pathways for youthful women
to be part of the leadership of sports
management would be brilliant.
Yes.
Perfect, perfect.
Now in, in, in, in, in, in.
Now, from the perspective of ASMA you know,
and your role and what do you think are,
you know, what is,
what would you like to accomplish?
You know,
in terms of and what do you think our
ASMA should be actually putting attention in terms of priorities,
you know, so your, your, your wishes,
you know, your, your, your goals.
What would you would you like to
accomplish through asthma?
And what do you see that ASMA should be putting attention, right, in terms of,
you know, opportunities or challenges?
Two things come to mind,
Prof that I'm passionate about close
collaboration.
It does not matter in what aspect,
whether it's leadership or there's in
participation, we need to collaborate.
We need to sit down and understand what
are your strengths, what are mine,
where can we help each other.
And I think if we have that one purpose
of mind, we'll achieve a lot.
Secondly, technology.
We cannot run away from that.
I'm an enthusiast of digital technology.
I preach digital literacy,
digital transformation.
Let's utilize those tools through
technology that you can reach as many
people learn through programs like this
online AI is the is a venture that we can
exploit and see what opportunities lie
there.
So I see a bright future.
Prof I am confident that Africa is on the
rise.
Absolutely absolutely.
I, I think that that optimism and,
and hard work, right, right,
actually will take you, you know, for,
for, for some of the, you know,
goals that you have mentioned, right.
So Doctor Tubey thank you for your inspiring and
thoughtful reflections.
Your leaderships and commitment to
integrating sport educations and
sustainable development across Africa are
truly commendable,
right to our participants.
I hope this conversation has enriched
your understanding of the broader
ecosystems shaping sport management in Africa through Doctor Tubey, you know,
perspective,
particularly the intersections of policy,
education, tourism, and social change.
Once again, Doctor Tuvi,
thank you for taking the time to share
your insight with us today.
Thank you, Sir, and have a good day.
Thank you, thank you, thank you.